Let us firstly say thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales who supported this project which is
about Tiger Bay, Bute Town and that area and try to help people understand something about
the place.
HDA is grateful to them.
This particular episode, story is an explanation which attempts to counter one of the nastier
and more mischievous impressions about Tiger Bay and Bute Town.
In particular about Tiger Bay.
No one would say Tiger Bay was an area without crime.
It certainly had gambling.
But consistently in the papers and in material you'll read now if you go onto Wikipedia
and tap in Tiger Bay you will find that it says area of high prostitution.
In fact what it says is the centre of prostitution in Cardiff at the time.
The problem with that is it simply wasn't true.
The crime figures don't show it nor does the other evidence.
What people do, lazy researchers and lazy people generally who want to collect stories,
what they do is they say well it's in the newspaper.
Well the newspapers, much of them were attacks on Tiger Bay and its residents and people
from other countries.
There was an article in Wales Online which was back in June 2019 when they talked about
the Cardiff Peaky Blinders.
And just like there was the Shelby family in Birmingham who were the actual Peaky Blinders,
Cardiff had its own.
And their main area for prostitution were two streets, both of which were lined with
brothels, Charlotte Street and Whitmore Lane.
Now if you're looking for them in Tiger Bay well you're not going to find them because
actually they were outside of Tiger Bay.
They are now where you will find the Marriott Hotel.
Both those streets will be under the Marriott and under the car park and they were alongside
the canal which of course is gone as well.
So if you were to compare a map now from 1851 to the present day you'd find yourself digging
up the lobby on Marriott Hotel with a JCB to find any remains of Charlotte Street in
particular but also Whitmore.
Those areas were filled with pimps and prostitutes, gangsters and thieves.
And there's a lot of research being done on this by a gentleman called Anthony Reese whose
relatives came from that area.
There is no evidence to show Anthony Reese's relatives were part of those particular industries
but they came from that area.
Now what he's done in his work and there's a book called Notorious and a great deal of
research he's identified some of these people.
People like Ned Llewellyn, Livable Dick and the aptly named John Thomas, we won't go there,
were reported in the Cardiff Merthyr Guardian in 1847 because they used to kick and knock
the poor girls about as a boy would a football.
The canal that ran alongside those areas became known for suicides.
With reports of prostitutes throwing themselves into the water in desperate bids to escape
the horrors of their daily lives.
Those canals were also full of numerous unwanted babies, some of which were drowned and others
suffocated beforehand and certainly dismembered bodies were also found bobbing in the water.
But plenty of women were also involved as brothel keepers such as Mrs. Protheroe at
63 years of age was the oldest owner of the oldest brothel in Cardiff and she got a lion's
share of the business on Whitmore Lane.
Not least because Whitmore Lane was right next to a building where sailors got paid
off after they were arrived back from the ships and there were others like Mary the
Cripple so called because she had withered legs and could not walk.
She was an amazing woman given her circumstances says Mr. Rees.
Imagine being a disabled woman living in the early Victorian period and still managed to
carve out for yourself a 40 year career as the head of a small criminal empire first
in Newport and then in Cardiff.
Her first arrest is recorded in 1835 when she got sent down for keeping a brothel and
she was still procuring girls in Cardiff in 1876 41 years later and her son Abraham Reardwood
was still running brothels in Cardiff up until the 1920s.
Now you'll find very little about Charlotte Street or Whitmore because it was such an
embarrassment that actually they didn't talk about it.
There wasn't much in the press because well I guess for those kind of areas to be such
a great success someone would need to know and let's say someone would be assisting
the criminals to try and make sure they did not end up in court.
Now all of the petty sessions books that's the transcriptions from the court are in the
Glamorgan archives.
Meanwhile now if you think about where to drink in those streets there would be places
like the lame chicken, the Noah's Ark, the flying eagle, the wild wave, the Irishman's
glory and the coal hole all of which are gone.
One booze out of one pub may well survive that's the Golden Cross which started as
the shield and Newcastle in 1846 before changing its name several times.
It was on what would have been the corner of Whitmore Lane and Bute Street.
Now that's the only connection.
Bute Street was at the very end of Bute Street.
It wasn't part of the bay it was certainly not part of Bute Town.
Now there are very very few pictures of the people from those times.
There will only be on court record in mugshots.
There is one such on Wales online of Swansea Dan also known as Daniel Davis a boatman and
a bully from Whitmore Lane and he was sent to Pentonville prison in 1876 for a firearms
charge.
Now the connection between the boatman and the prostitution is quite important.
An awful lot of boatmen according to these records were also what's called bullies.
A bully was the other name for someone who was a pimp and operated a ring of prostitutes.
We need to be clear these people were not from Tiger Bay.
They were not the people identified by the papers which largely were these people from
other countries from overseas.
The nearest most of these people came from being overseas is because at the time there
was a strong connection between Irish families and the crime.
But the one thing we do know is someone needed to be blamed and once again that was Tiger
Bay and the many races who lived possibly up to 45 different nationalities in modern
terms that lived in Tiger Bay.
Now I'm not saying there weren't prostitutes in Tiger Bay but there is a big difference
between prostitutes which were all over Cardiff, brothels which were all over Cardiff and an
occasional brothel and the main centres and the way most of the time it's described is
that Tiger Bay was the main centre of prostitution.
It was not.
It was a residence for families, for merchant seamen in between ships and for extremely
wealthy people who occupied places such as Mount Stewart Square, Loudoun Square etc.
So the point of what I guess I'm trying to say here is much is said about Tiger Bay.
If you read something about it I would suggest you say where's the evidence?
The reality is Tiger Bay was a working class area full of people who lived their lives
and as the city got wealthier and wealthier from the work, much of it of those working
class people it increasingly wanted to distance itself from the working class environment
and those people from overseas and they became the brunt and the blame for so much that was
normal in Cardiff and crime certainly was before the people from the Empire arrived
in the bay there were different gangs operating in Cardiff regularly but there is no evidence
to show that the people from the bay or the new people from overseas in terms of certainly
Africa, Arab countries, Caribbean countries, Italy, India, there's no evidence to show
they were major players or running brothels or leaders in criminality.
There is a great deal of evidence to show however they were family people.
I hope this has helped you understand a little bit about how people get labelled and then
conveniently that label stays because people quote a paper from 1850 or 1880 when there
was no complaint against what was written in the press about you.
Thanks for listening.